So it would be really great if we could listen to our own event from outside our component and not
just from inside because that kind of defeats its purpose,
right?
Well the good thing is when we create such an event, we can specify an object as a second argument where
we can add some information about how this event should behave
and there, we basically got three configurations.
Bubbles allows us to define whether this event should bubble up or not,
this means if it should only be available on the element we dispatched it on or if it is not handled
there,
if it should go to the next element in the DOM tree.
So in our case for this button, the cancel button, if we don't add an event listener there,
it would bubble up and event listeners on the section would handle it
and if we had no event listeners there, it would bubble up and event listeners on this div would handle
it
and if we have no listeners there, it would bubble up and so on.
So this doesn't sound too bad right,
if I set this to true, let's see,
now theoretically we should be able to listen to it from other places too and not just on event listeners
on this button.
So maybe now our event listener on our custom component which in the end wraps this button works.
So let's go back and reload and click cancel,
still no output.
The reason for that is that there is another important argument and that is the composed argument here.
Composed when set to true now suddenly ensures that this will work.
If I now click cancel, you see cancelled here and
the reason for that is that composed, which by default is false just like bubbles, composed means that if
you set it to true, then this event may leave the shadow DOM in which it is, if it is in one
and here of course, it is triggered inside of our shadow DOM.
If you set composed to false, then the event must not leave our shadow DOM tree, so it will bubble up
but only inside our shadow DOM tree,
so we could add a listener to modal and handle it but not outside of our component. So we need to set
both to true, bubbles and composed to handle our event outside of our component
and now we can listen to it.
Now this is one way of doing that,
of course there is a simpler way too.
I just show you this way because sometimes you need to take that route
but of course for confirm and we could have done that for cancel too,
we can also just refer to this which is our component, so our own custom element in the end.
Remember our modal extends the HTML element,
so this really refers to our own custom HTML element in the end and therefore, our custom element
itself also has the dispatch event method.
So here, our confirm event can also be holding a new event, here in the confirm event, so the name is
confirm
and you can pick any name you want but of course it should match the name you are listening to outside
and then here, I will use this confirm event and now if I save this without any extra config and I
click OK,
we still get confirmed because now, we're triggering this event on our element itself,
so not inside the shadow DOM, not on some nested element in the shadow DOM but on our custom element
itself and therefore, listeners on our element will of course receive that event.
It will not bubble up there now though,
so if we would want to listen to it on the body in our main document,
this should not work but we also don't need to manage composed and so on
because this is now simply not required.
So this is of course the shorter alternative and the one you would typically use
but I found it important to mention how you can use bubbles and composed to also let events triggered
inside your shadow DOM on some nested element
bubble up through the shadow DOM and potentially even leave it with composed.
So these are custom events and how we can handle it
and now we have the full flexibility we might need,
we're closing the modal and in our main application which we typically would run or import in our
main document, like this index.html
file, there
we can now also find out which button the user pressed without having to kind of dig into our component
and try to attach listeners to the buttons in the component from outside.
Instead we use these convenient listeners on our custom element itself.